
## CodeBook for Generation of a Tidy data set Project assingment

*Used the [Guide to Cookbooks](https://github.com/pablitoarias/GettingAndCleaning/blob/master/CookBook.md) published by the ICPSR as a reference for this codebook*

This codebook describes the contents and structure of the Data_Step_5.txt uploaded to the Cousera assignment page and generated by the assignment script [run_analysis.R](https://github.com/pablitoarias/GettingAndCleaning/blob/master/run_analysis.R)

Author: Pablo Arias

This tidy dataset was produced with data generated from the following research
```
Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset Version 1.0
Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto.
Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory
DITEN - Università degli Studi di Genova.
Via Opera Pia 11A, I-16145, Genoa, Italy.
activityrecognition@smartlab.ws
www.smartlab.ws
```

### Source for the Data
Experiments were carried out with 30 volunteers. Each volunteer performed six physical activities while wearing a smartphone on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz were captured. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into a training and a test set.

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. 

The original dataset is compromised of the following files:

- 'README.txt: 
- 'features_info.txt': Shows information about the variables used on the feature vector.
- 'features.txt': List of all features.
- 'activity_labels.txt': Links the class labels with their activity name.
- 'train/X_train.txt': Training set.
- 'train/y_train.txt': Training labels.
- 'test/X_test.txt': Test set.
- 'test/y_test.txt': Test labelsSee 'features_info.txt' for more details. 

For each record it is provided:

- Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration.
- Triaxial Angular velocity from the gyroscope. 
- A 561-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables. 
- Its activity label. 
- An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.

*Refer to the original dataset for more details on the data*

### Tidy Data Set and Variable Description

The assignment required to extract only the features with Mean and Standard Deviation values from the original dataset. This was done by filtering features names with the words "mean" and "std". A subset of 86 from the original 561 features was filtered.

Then mean for each feature was generated for each Subject and each Activity to generate 180 records (30 Subjects x 6 Activities). Below the description of each of the variables and their values

        
#### Variable name prefixes        
- SubjectActivityMean Prefix: The rest of the variables are prefixed with this string to reflect that they are referring to the Mean a particular Activity done by a specific Subject
- TimeDomian Prefix: Two sets of acceleration and gyroscope variables were recorded and calculated (Time and Frequency), this refers to variables recorded in the Time Domain. These time domain signals were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. For this dataset they were then grouped by Subject and Activity to generate a mean value. Values are normalized and bounded between -1 and 1.
- FrequencyDomain Prefix: This refers to features calculated in the frequency domain, using a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)again grouped by Subject and Activity to generate a mean value. Values are normalized and bonded between -1 and 1
- Body Prefix: Component of acceleration and gyroscope measurements associated to the Body mass of the subject decoupled from the effects of Gravity
- Gravity Prefix: Component of acceleration and gyroscope measurements associated to the Gravity effect on the subject, decoupled from the Body mass
- Jerk: Jerk signals obtained for Body and Gyroscope measurements derived in time from the original measurements
- Acceleration: Acceleration component
- Magnitude: Refers to the magnitude of the Body, Gravity, Jerk and Gyroscope measurements using Euclidean norm
- Angle(A, B) Prefix: refers to angles between vectors A and B
- [X,Y,Z]Axis: Refers to the axis in the euclidean reference
- Mean: Refers to a mean value
- StandardDeviation: refers to a Standard Deviation value

#### Variables and some examples
- Subject: An integer number between  [1,30] representing the 30 subjects that participated in the research.
- Activity: Each of the activities the subjects were asked to do and label used to represent them in the data
        
        - WALKING
        - WALKING_UPSTAIRS
        - WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
        - SITTING
        - LAYING
- SubjectActivityMeanTimeDomainBodyAccelerationMeanXAxis: Mean of the Mean for the X Axis Body acceleration component in the time domain for a particular activity of a particular subject. (Note that in the original data set there were some mean values, that is why there are means of means)  
- SubjectActivityMeanTimeDomainGravityAccelerationStandardDeviationYAxis: Mean Standard Deviation for the Y Axis Gravity Acceleration component in the Time Domain for a particular activity and subject
- SubjectActivityMeanTimeDomainBodyAccelerationJerkStandardDeviationZAxis: Mean Standard Deviation for the Z Axis Jerk Acceleration component in the Time Domain for a particular activity and subject
- SubjectActivityMeanFrequencyDomainBodyBodyAccelerationJerkMagnitudeStandardDeviation: Mean of the Standard Deviation for the Magnitude of the Body Acceleration Jerk in the frequency domain for a particular activity and subject

